---
title: Inverse protein folding via denoising diffusion
summary: Design proteins using mask prior-guided denoising diffusion for inverse protein folding
tags:
- AI4Science
- Protein Engineering
- Generative AI
- Selected
date: "2024-12-10"

authors:
- Peizhen Bai
- Filip Miljkovic
- Xianyuan Liu
- Leonardo De Maria
- Rebecca Croasdale-Wood
- Owen Rackham
- Haiping Lu

# Optional external URL for project (replaces project detail page).
external_link: ""

image:
  caption: 
  focal_point: Smart

# links:
# - icon: twitter
#   icon_pack: fab
#   name: Follow
#   url: https://twitter.com/georgecushen
url_code: "https://github.com/peizhenbai/MapDiff"
url_pdf: "https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.07815"
# url_slides: ""
# url_video: ""

# Slides (optional).
#   Associate this project with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides = "example-slides"` references `content/slides/example-slides.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides = ""`.
# slides: example
---

Inverse protein folding generates valid amino acid sequences that can fold into a desired protein structure, with recent deep-learning advances showing significant potential and competitive performance. However, challenges remain in predicting highly uncertain regions, such as those with loops and disorders. To tackle such low-confidence residue prediction, we propose a **Ma**sk **p**rior-guided denoising **Diff**usion (**MapDiff**) framework that accurately captures both structural and residue interactions for inverse protein folding. MapDiff is a discrete diffusion probabilistic model that iteratively generates amino acid sequences with reduced noise, conditioned on a given protein backbone. To incorporate structural and residue interactions, we develop a graph-based denoising network with a mask prior pre-training strategy. Moreover, in the generative process, we combine the denoising diffusion implicit model with Monte-Carlo dropout to improve uncertainty estimation. Evaluation on four challenging sequence design benchmarks shows that MapDiff significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, the in-silico sequences generated by MapDiff closely resemble the physico-chemical and structural characteristics of native proteins across different protein families and architectures.